KIC Upgrading (#1241)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/kubernetes-ingress-controller/faq/upgrading-ingress-controller.md

  - text: Upgrading {{ site.base_gateway }}
    url: /kubernetes-ingress-controller/faq/upgrading-gateway/

---

{:.warning}
> If you are upgrading from {{ site.kic_product_name }} 2.12, read the [upgrading to 3.0 section first](#upgrade-to-kong-ingress-controller-3-0)

## Prerequisites

1.  Ensure that you installed {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.0 or above, using [Helm](https://github.com/Kong/charts/).

1. Fetch the latest version of the Kong Helm chart using `helm repo update`.

1. Update your `values.yaml` file to use the latest version of {{ site.kic_product_name }}. The values to set are different depending on if you've installed with the `kong/ingress` chart or the `kong/kong` chart. You can find which chart you're using by running `helm list -A -o yaml | grep chart`.

{% capture the_code %}
{% navtabs helm %}
{% navtab "kong/ingress" %}
```yaml
controller:
  ingressController:
    image:
      tag: {{ site.data.kic_latest.release }}
```
{% endnavtab %}
{% navtab "kong/kong" %}
```yaml
ingressController:
  image:
    tag: {{ site.data.kic_latest.release }}
```
{% endnavtab %}
{% endnavtabs %}
{% endcapture %}
{{ the_code | indent }}

## Update custom resource definitions

> Custom resource definitions (CRDs) are not upgraded when running `helm upgrade`. To manually upgrade the CRDs in your cluster run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom resource definitions (CRDs) are not upgraded when running `helm upgrade`. To manually upgrade the CRDs in your cluster, run the following command:
```

```bash
kubectl kustomize https://github.com/kong/kubernetes-ingress-controller/config/crd?ref=v{{ site.data.kic_latest.release }} | kubectl apply -f -
```

## Gateway API versions

Gateway API resources are constantly evolving, and {{ site.kic_product_name }} is updated to use the latest version of the Gateway API CRDs with each release.

{{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.2 and 3.4 contain Gateway API changes that require operator intervention.

### {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.2

Starting from version 3.2, {{ site.kic_product_name }} supports Gateway API version 1.1.
The primary change in Gateway API v1.1 is the promotion of `GRPCRoute` from v1alpha2 to v1.

If you have been using the Standard Channel of the Gateway API, then you don't need to do anything extra.
Download the latest version of the CRD from the Standard Channel and install it in your cluster directly.

> If you have installed the Experimental Channel of Gateway API v1.0, complete the following steps to upgrade to version v1.1 of the CRD:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you installed the Experimental Channel of Gateway API v1.0, complete the following steps to upgrade to version v1.1 of the CRD.
```

1. Install the Experimental Channel of Gateway API v1.1:

   ```sh
   kubectl apply --force=true -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/releases/download/v1.1.0/experimental-install.yaml  
   ```

>    `--force=true` is necessary because upstream updated the CRD directly for the alpha stage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   `--force=true` is necessary because the upstream updated the CRD directly for the alpha stage
```

   [without preserving the definition of the old version](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/3086).

1. Update all your manifests to use `v1` instead of `v1alpha2`.

> 1. [Upgrade to {{ site.kic_product_name }} v3.2](#upgrade).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Upgrade to {{ site.kic_product_name }} v3.2](#upgrade-kong-ingress-controller).
```
I think that's the correct link

### {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.4

> Starting from version 3.4, {{ site.kic_product_name }} supports Gateway API version 1.2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting in {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.4, {{ site.kic_product_name }} supports Gateway API version 1.2.
```
Just to make it clear it's not Kong Gateway 3.4

There is a breaking change in Gateway API 1.2 to remove the `v1alpha2` version of `GRPCRoute` and `ReferenceGrant`.

> If you have been using gateway API v1.1 and {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.2 and above, and there are no `GRPCRoute` and `ReferenceGrant` resources stored in `v1alpha2` version, you can directly upgrade gateway API from v1.1 to v1.2. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have been using Gateway API v1.1 and {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.2 and above, and there are no `GRPCRoute` and `ReferenceGrant` resources stored in `v1alpha2` version, you can directly upgrade Gateway API from v1.1 to v1.2. 
```

> You can use the following script to ensure your `GRPCRoute` and `ReferenceGrant` CRDs are not using `v1alpha2` storage version:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the following script to ensure your `GRPCRoute` and `ReferenceGrant` CRDs aren't using `v1alpha2` storage version:
```

```bash
kubectl get grpcroutes -A -o jsonpath='{.items[*].apiVersion}' | tr ' ' '\n' | sort | uniq -c
kubectl get referencegrants -A -o jsonpath='{.items[*].apiVersion}' | tr ' ' '\n' | sort | uniq -c
```

> If the output contains `v1alpha2`, it means that there are `GRPCRoute`s or `ReferenceGrant`s (or both) using `v1alpha2` storage version and you need to update the manifests before upgrading.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the output contains `v1alpha2`, it means that there are one or more `GRPCRoute` or `ReferenceGrant` (or both) using `v1alpha2` storage version and you must update the manifests before upgrading.
```

Otherwise, upgrade Gateway API and {{ site.kic_product_name }} following these steps:

1. Ensure you are using Gateway API 1.1 (you can upgrade by following the steps in the section above).

> 2. Ensure you are using {{ site.kic_product_name }} version 3.2 (or above).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Ensure you are using {{ site.kic_product_name }} version 3.2 or later.
```

3. Update all your `GRPCRoute` manifests to use `v1` instead of `v1alpha2` and your `ReferenceGrant` manifests to use `v1beta1` instead of `v1alpha2`. This can be done by following the [upgrade guide from Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/?h=v1.2#v12-upgrade-notes).
4. Install the standard or experimental channel of Gateway API 1.2.

## Upgrade {{ site.kic_product_name }}

Run the following command, specifying the old release name, the namespace where you've configured {{site.base_gateway}}, and the existing `values.yaml` configuration file.

{% navtabs helm %}
{% navtab "kong/ingress" %}
```shell
$ helm upgrade ${YOUR_RELEASE_NAME} kong/ingress \
  --namespace ${YOUR_NAMESPACE} \
  -f ./values.yaml
```
{% endnavtab %}
{% navtab "kong/kong" %}
```shell
$ helm upgrade ${YOUR_RELEASE_NAME} kong/kong \
  --namespace ${YOUR_NAMESPACE} \
  -f ./values.yaml
```
{% endnavtab %}
{% endnavtabs %}

> After the upgrade completes there is a brief period of time before the new resources are online. You can wait for the relevant Pod resources to cycle by watching them in your release namespace:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the upgrade completes, there's a brief period of time before the new resources are online. You can wait for the relevant Pod resources to cycle by watching them in your release namespace:
```

```shell
$ kubectl -n ${YOUR_RELEASE_NAMESPACE} get pods -w
```

Once the new pods are in a `Ready` state, the upgrade is complete.

## Rollback

If you run into problems during or after the upgrade, Helm provides a rollback mechanism to revert to a previous revision of the release.

```shell
$ helm rollback --namespace ${YOUR_RELEASE_NAMESPACE} ${YOUR_RELEASE_NAME}
```

You can wait for the rollback to complete by watching the relevant Pod resources:

```shell
$ kubectl -n ${YOUR_RELEASE_NAMESPACE} get pods -w
```

After a rollback, if you run into issues in production, consider using a testing environment to identify and correct these issues, or reference the [troubleshooting documentation](/index/kubernetes-ingress-controller/#troubleshooting).

## Upgrade to {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.0

Upgrading from {{ site.kic_product_name }} 2.12 to 3.x+ is a major version change which contains breaking changes. To safely upgrade, follow these steps.

1. **Switch to Helm as your deployment mechanism.**

    As of {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.0, [Helm](https://github.com/Kong/charts/) is the only officially supported install method.

> 1. **Upgrade Kong to version 3.4.1 or later.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **[Upgrade {{site.base_gateway}}](/gateway/upgrade/) to version 3.4.1 or later.**
```

Author: The Gateway upgrade guide isn't relevant here (confusing, I know)

>     {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.0 requires Kong version 3.4.1 or later. You must upgrade your Kong instances to 3.4.1 before you upgrade to {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.0 requires {{site.base_gateway}} 3.4.1 or later. You must upgrade your {{site.base_gateway}} instances to 3.4.1 before you upgrade to {{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.0.
```

1. **Update the {{ site.kic_product_name }} CRDs.**

    Helm does not upgrade CRDs automatically. You must apply the 3.x CRDs before you upgrade your releases.

    ```bash
    kubectl kustomize https://github.com/Kong/kubernetes-ingress-controller/config/crd/?ref=v3.0.0 | kubectl apply -f -
    ```

1. **Convert `KongIngress` `route` and `service` fields to annotations.**

>     Route (Ingress) and service (Service) configuration fields previously available in KongIngress are now all handled via [dedicated annotations](/kubernetes-ingress-controller/reference/annotations/) and will not be respected if set in `KongIngress`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Route (Ingress) and Service (Service) configuration fields previously available in `KongIngress` are now all handled via [dedicated annotations](/kubernetes-ingress-controller/reference/annotations/) and will not be respected if set in `KongIngress`.
```

1. **Remove the `Knative` feature gate if set.**

    As KNative is [no longer supported](https://github.com/Kong/kubernetes-ingress-controller/issues/2813), you need to use another controller for KNative Ingress resources if you use them.

1. **Remove or rename outdated CLI arguments and `CONTROLLER_*` environment variables.**

    Version 3.0 removes or renames several flags that were previously deprecated, were removed due to other changes, or were left over for compatibility after their functionality was removed.
    
    The CLI argument versions of flags are listed below. You must also change the equivalent `CONTROLLER_` (for example, `CONTROLLER_SYNC_RATE_LIMIT` for `--sync-rate-limit`) environment variable if you use those.
    
    * `--sync-rate-limit` is now `--proxy-sync-seconds`.
    * `--konnect-runtime-group-id` is now `--konnect-control-plane-id`.

>     * `--stderrthreshold` and `--debug-log-reduce-redundancy` have been removed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * `--stderrthreshold` and `--debug-log-reduce-redundancy` were removed
```

      following changes to the logging system.
    * `--log-level` no longer accepts the `warn`, `fatal`, and `panic` values due
      to [consolidation of log levels](#logging-changes).

>     * `--update-status-on-shutdown` has been removed after its earlier

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * `--update-status-on-shutdown` was removed after its earlier
```

      functionality was removed.

>     * `--kong-custom-entities-secret` has been removed after removal of its
>       functionality in 2.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * `--kong-custom-entities-secret` was removed after its
      functionality was removed in 2.0.
```

>     * `--leader-elect` has been removed. The controller automatically configures

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * `--leader-elect` was removed. The controller automatically configures
```

      its leader election mode based on other settings.
    * `--enable-controller-ingress-extensionsv1beta1` and

>       `--enable-controller-ingress-networkingv1beta1` have been removed following

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      `--enable-controller-ingress-networkingv1beta1` were removed following
```

      removal of support for older Ingress API versions.

### Notable changes

The following changes are not considered breaking changes. However, they are notable changes from the previous version and are documented here for completeness.

#### Expression Router

> Kong 3.0 introduced a new [expression-based routing engine][expression-router]. This engine allows {{ site.kic_product_name }} to set some match criteria and route matching precedence not possible under the original Kong routing engine. This functionality is necessary to implement some aspects of the Gateway API specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{site.base_gateway}} 3.0 introduced a new [expression-based routing engine](/gateway/routing/expressions/). This engine allows {{ site.kic_product_name }} to set some match criteria and route matching precedence not possible under the original {{site.base_gateway}} routing engine. This functionality is necessary to implement some aspects of the Gateway API specification.
```

[expression-kong-conf]: https://github.com/Kong/kong/blob/3.4.2/kong.conf.default#L1589-L1621
[gateway-api-precedence]: https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io%2fv1.HTTPRouteRule

#### Logging changes

{{ site.kic_product_name }} 3.0 uses a new logging engine to unify the logging implementation across all its subsystems. Earlier versions used different logging engines in different subsystems, which led to some logs using a different format than others and some logs appearing at incorrect log levels.

The new logging system consolidates log levels into `debug`, `info`, and `error`. Logs that were previously logged at the `warn` level are now logged at `error`, as the conditions that triggered `warn` level logs were infrequent and should not occur under normal circumstances. `fatal` and `panic` levels were available in configuration, but were not actually used.

The new logging system changes the default `console` format. In earlier versions, console logs used a `key=value` format:

```text
time="2023-09-21T23:07:26Z" level=info msg="the ingress class name has been set" logger=setup value=kong othervalue=pong
```

> In 3.0, `console` is a mixture of unlabeled tab-delimited fields (for standard keys such as timestamp, log level, and log section) and JSON (for fields specific to individual log entries:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In 3.0, `console` is a mixture of unlabeled tab-delimited fields (for standard keys such as timestamp, log level, and log section) and JSON (for fields specific to individual log entries):
```

```text
2023-09-22T00:38:16.026Z        info    setup   the ingress class name has been set     {"value": "kong","othervalue":"pong"}
```

The `json` format is unchanged except for the order of fields. Earlier versions printed fields in alphabetical order:

```json
{"level":"info","logger":"setup","msg":"the ingress class name has been set","time":"2023-09-21T23:15:15Z","value":"kong"}
```

> 3.0+ prints standard log fields first and entry-specific fields in the order they were added in code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{site.base_gateway}} 3.0 or later prints standard log fields first and entry-specific fields in the order they were added in code:
```
